Technology-Assisted Ankle Rehabilitation Improves Balance and Gait Performance in Stroke Survivors: A Randomized Controlled Study With 1-Month Follow-Up
Many stroke survivors have limited ankle range of motion (ROM) caused by weak dorsiflexors and stiff plantarflexors. Passive ankle stretching exercises with physical therapists or a stretching board are usually recommended, but these treatments have some limitations (e.g., cost and availability of physical therapists). In this paper, we assessed the results of ankle stretching exercises delivered by a robotic ankle stretching system called motorized ankle stretcher (MAS) that we developed or by a stretching board on ankle ROM, balance control, and gait performance. The 16 stroke survivors were randomly assigned to an intervention group (IG) or a control group (CG) and participated in seven sessions of dorsiflexion stretching exercises for three-and-a-half consecutive weeks. Laboratory assessments included pre-assessment (baseline at the beginning of the first exercise session), post-assessment (at the end of the seventh exercise session), and retention assessment (one month after the seventh exercise session). All assessments included ankle ROM for the affected side, static/dynamic balance control with a sensory organization test (SOT), walking speed, walking cadence, and step length for the affected and unaffected sides. During seven sessions of ankle stretching exercises, the IG performed them using the MAS, and the CG used a stretching board. The IG significantly improved ankle ROM, SOT scores (i.e., static/dynamic balance control), walking speeds, walking cadences, and step lengths for the unaffected side after completing the seven exercise sessions of ankle stretching exercises and maintained the enhancements at the retention assessment. The CG did not significantly improve across the majority of outcome measures except for the SOT scores between the pre-assessment and retention assessment. Future work will investigate the ideal intensity, frequency, and duration of exercising with the MAS. Our research on technology-assisted ankle rehabilitation, which can ascertain the level of persistent improvement, long-term performance retention, and carry-over effects in stroke survivors, can be used to inform future designs.